Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking about
The Unusual Names of Cocktails.
Now, you might be the sort of person
who thinks of themselves as something
of a cocktail connoisseur, able
to make the perfect Negroni or Tom
Collins without a second thought.
Or you might never have drunk
a drop of alcohol in your life.
Whatever side of the cocktail
love/hate spectrum you would place
yourself, it’s hard to deny that the
history of cocktails is fascinating.
These drinks often come with amazing
backstories, and in this episode
we are going to explore the history
of cocktails overall, and dive into
the stories of some of the most
interesting, from the Margarita
right through to the Singapore Sling.
Along the way we’ll meet Ice
Kings, zealous queens, and more.
OK then, let’s get right into it.
If you look up the word “cocktail” in a
dictionary, you’ll find something like
“an alcoholic drink consisting of a spirit
or spirits mixed with other ingredients,
such as fruit juice or cream.”
This term, “cocktail”, was first recorded
in 1798, but the concept of a cocktail,
or at least of adding tasty things to
alcohol, has existed for millennia.
For better or worse, humans practically
since the dawn of time have enjoyed the
feeling that comes from drinking alcohol.
Alcohol, after all, is a drug,
it does change the way you feel.
And while the effects of alcohol
are considered pleasant by many,
the taste of alcohol itself
is not so universally enjoyed.
So, going back thousands of years, people
have looked for ways to make the process
of drinking alcohol more pleasant.
Going back to the ancient Greeks,
there are records of honey and
spices being added to wine.
All over the world, people would add
all sorts of things to their wine
and beer to try to make the taste
more palatable, to camouflage the
taste of the alcohol in the drink.
With the discovery of spices and more
widespread availability of sugar, this
all started to go into wine and beer,
which, let’s remember, were often drunk
pretty much constantly in large parts of
Europe as safer alternatives to water.
When distillation started to become
more widespread, when the technique of
producing spirits, stronger alcohol,
reached Europe, clearly there was
an even greater need to disguise
the taste of this stronger alcohol.
And while the US is probably the country
most associated with cocktails, the
first “cocktail” is widely believed
to be something called “punch”,
which is thought to have been created
by a British soldier in India.
You might know a “punch” now as a big
bowl of alcohol with various fruit
juices, and back in the 17th century,
when the first record of punch can be
found, it met this modern criteria.
It was, and I’m quoting directly, "a
kind of drink consisting of aqua vitae,
rose-water, juice of citrons and sugar."
It was a cocktail.
Now, punch has its own fascinating
history, but we must move on.
And to continue our exploration of
the unusual names of cocktails, we
must cross the Atlantic to the United
States, the country that is now
synonymous with cocktail drinking.
And before we get into the stories
of the cocktails themselves, I must
introduce you to a peculiar character,
a man by the name of Fredric Tudor.
He was born in Boston, Massachusetts,
in 1783, and by his death, in 1864 he
would have pioneered the transport and
sale of ice all over the world, earning
himself the nickname of “the Ice King”.
From a young age, he was convinced
that there was a fortune to be made
in transporting ice from the ponds
of New England, in the northeast of
the United States, to the rest of the
country, to  warmer areas without ice.
He decided not to go to Harvard,
and instead, he focussed on what
must have seemed like a mad dream,
transporting ice in the days before
widespread artificial refrigeration.
He cut huge blocks of ice out of
frozen ponds, loaded them up on large
ships, and tried everything he could
to stop the ice melting before it
arrived at ports to the south of the
country, and even in the Caribbean.
Covering the ice in wood shavings
was one idea, building a sort
of roof over it was another.
Eventually, after multiple iterations,
improving the insulation and buying faster
ships, he was able to transport 180 tonnes
of ice all the way to Calcutta, in India.
His ice empire was born, and
he became one of the richest
men in America in the process.
Now, bringing this back to cocktails,
why was he important, why do we need
to know the story of the Ice King?
Well, because cocktails need ice.
Practically every modern cocktail comes
with some form of ice, and cocktails
are much more palatable when drunk cold.
So, you could say, there could be
no cocktails without the Ice King.
But there were a couple of other important
innovations we need to mention that made
widespread cocktail drinking possible.
Firstly, artificial carbonation,
making drinks fizzy.
This happened in 1767, by a man
called Jacob Schweppe, yes, that
is where “Schweppes” comes from.
And secondly, in 1826, something
called “continuous distillation”,
which was essentially the process
to make producing spirits, strong
alcohol, much more efficient.
So, by the mid-19th century, the US
had all of the ingredients required
for a cocktail boom: ice, fizzy drinks,
strong alcohol, and a heavy drinking
culture, a very thirsty population.
So thirsty, in fact, that it would lead
to the 1919 Volstead Act, and Prohibition,
the 13-year period at the start of
the 20th century when practically all
alcohol was banned in the United States.
By the way, if you haven’t
listened to our episode on
Prohibition yet, that’s number 261.
Now, back to cocktails.
Ever since the end of Prohibition,
in 1933, cocktails have been on
an upwards trajectory, they have
gone from strength to strength.
Whether it was James Bond’s signature
“vodka martini, shaken not stirred”, or
the “mad men” of the New York advertising
world’s constant thirst for Old Fashioned,
or the more recent trend of Instagrammable
colourful drinks like Negronis or
Aperol Spritz, it might seem like we are
drinking more cocktails than ever before,
And some of them have fascinating
origin stories, stories I should
add that are often debated, there
are multiple versions of them, but
they’re interesting nonetheless.
So, without further ado, our
first cocktail is the most popular
cocktail in the world, the Margarita.
In case you need a reminder of
what a margarita is, it’s a mix
of tequila, triple sec, and lemon
juice, and is often served with
salt around the rim of the glass.
Like most cocktails, there are several
claims about who invented the margarita.
One claim is that it was invented by
accident by a Mexican bartender who was
trying to make a Mexican drink consisting
of brandy, triple sec, and lemon juice.
He reached for the brandy bottle,
but instead of brandy he picked up a
bottle of tequila, and lo and behold,
he accidentally invented the margarita.
Another claim is that there was a fussy
customer, a dancer called Marjorie
King, who said she was allergic to
all spirits except tequila, and the
owner of a Tijuana restaurant invented
this twist on the “ tequila shot”
specifically for her, an alternative,
longer drink, compared to a simple shot.
There’s also another theory that
the “margarita” is actually only
a twist, a variant, on an older
cocktail called “The Daisy”, which
was popular during prohibition.
The Daisy has exactly the same
ingredients, except it uses
brandy rather than tequila.
And as the Spanish speakers among you
may know, or if you speak another Romance
language you can probably guess, the
word for daisy in Spanish is….Margarita.
Our second cocktail is also going to be a
woman’s name, but this time it’s something
slightly less pleasant, or at least has
a less pleasant story: the Bloody Mary.
Again, if you need a reminder about
how to make a Bloody Mary, it’s tomato
juice with vodka, Worcestershire sauce
and tabasco, and it’s often drunk
on aeroplanes or even the morning
after a heavy night of drinking.
It’s an unusual concoction,
certainly, so where did it come from?
Well, it’s thought to have been invented
by a French bartender in 1921, a man
called Fernand Petiot, who worked at
the famous Harry’s Bar in Paris, a
bar where the famously thirsty writer
Ernest Hemingway could often be found.
There are several other claims, but
the more interesting question is
about why it’s called a “Bloody Mary”.
The most popular theory is that
it was named after Mary I of
England, a particularly bloodthirsty
queen who was known for burning
Protestants at the stake.
It’s not the only theory, of course.
There is another theory that it was named
after an actress, Mary Pickford, as well
as a mere waitress at a Chicago bar.
And a completely different theory
about where it comes from is that
it can all be traced back to a
mispronunciation of “Vladimir”.
This might sound unlikely, but it is
somewhat more plausible when you learn
that one of the people the French
bartender made the drink for was Vladimir
Smirnov, of the Smirnov vodka dynasty.
So, perhaps the bartender simply
couldn't say Vladimir properly, he
said something like “loody mir”,
and the drink became “Bloody Mary”.
Now, we must stay, in fact, at
Harry’s Bar in Paris for our
third cocktail, the “Sidecar”.
A sidecar cocktail, if you don’t know,
is cognac, triple sec and lemon juice.
If you imagine an old motorbike and you
picture a little compartment with one
wheel on the side, with enough space for
a person to sit in, that’s a sidecar.
And the cocktail is thought to be
named after the motorbike attachment.
This origin story goes back to the end of
World War I, where there was an American
army captain who would reportedly drive
all the way up to the bar in the sidecar
of the motorbike and request this drink.
Other theories have it being invented
in London as well as across the Atlantic
in New Orleans, but I certainly like
the idea of this American captain
riding all the way up to the bar.
Now for cocktail number four, we
are going to go all the way to
the other side of the world, to
Singapore, for the Singapore Sling.
As a reminder, this drink has a gin
base, and is topped up with a mixture of
fruit juices and liquors to give a bright
pink colour, more like a large glass
of fruit juice than anything stronger.
And when it comes to cocktails with
debated origins, where there are multiple
different claims about who invented
it and where, the Singapore Sling is
pretty universally agreed to have been
invented sometime around 1915 by a man
called Ngiam Tong Boon who was working
at the famous Raffles hotel in Singapore.
Ngiam, the bartender, created this
drink to solve a very specific
problem, he created it with a
specific customer in mind: women.
See, at the start of the 20th century,
Singapore was still a British colony.
Men would come to the bar at
Raffles hotel to meet and drink.
Women would come too, but it still wasn’t
considered socially acceptable for women
to be seen drinking alcohol in public.
Ngiam’s clever idea was, well, I imagine
these women want to drink alcohol,
they just don’t want other people to
think that they’re drinking alcohol.
What if I create a drink that doesn’t
look alcoholic, it looks like a fruit
juice, so these women can happily
drink it without the social stigma
of being seen to drink in public.
And, ta-da, he was right.
It was a massive success, and you
can now find this cocktail being
made in bars all over the world.
Right, we have time
for two more cocktails.
Cocktail number six is one with
unusual ingredients, and an unusual
story of why it became so popular.
It’s the White Russian.
Now, again if you need a reminder of
what a White Russian is, the clue about
the main ingredient is in the name.
It’s a cream-based cocktail, with
vodka, cream and coffee liquor.
The origin story of the White Russian
is not so interesting, it’s thought to
have been invented, along with its sister
cocktail, the Black Russian, by a Belgian
barman at the Hotel Metropole in Brussels.
And, if you were hoping that it
was called a White Russian because
of some deep historical reference
to the White Army, or the Russian
Civil War, I’m sorry to disappoint.
The only reason it's called
“Russian”, is because it uses vodka,
and it’s actually far more popular
outside of Russia than within it.
But the interesting thing about the
White Russian is that its popularity
comes almost exclusively from a film,
the 1998 cult film “The Big Lebowski”.
If you’ve seen the film, you’ll know why.
The main character in the film, played
by Jeff Bridges, constantly drinks
this cocktail, downing a total of
9 White Russians during the movie.
It was quite a niche drink before,
but after the movie developed a cult
following, this drink became something
of a staple, and sales of one of the
main ingredients, Kahlua, boomed.
And for our final cocktail it’s time
for perhaps the simplest cocktail of
them all, a cocktail so simple you
might rightly argue that it isn’t
a cocktail at all: The Screwdriver.
The ingredients of a Screwdriver are
blissfully simple: orange juice and vodka.
Like the Singapore Sling, it
has the advantage of not looking
like it contains alcohol.
Vodka is colourless, and so the drink
is indistinguishable from orange juice.
And this cocktail has some wonderful
claims as to its origins, all of which
revolve around the fact that it’s a
cocktail that can be drunk without
people knowing it contains alcohol.
My favourite one is that it comes from
the mid 20th century, from American
oil workers in the middle east.
As an American oil worker working in the
middle of the desert, before widespread
TV, there were limited ways to pass
the time, you had limited access to
interesting alcoholic ingredients, and
more importantly, you weren’t meant to be
drinking when operating heavy equipment.
Perhaps someone might have brought in
a bottle of vodka from a recent trip,
and there might have been concentrated
orange juice provided in your base.
So, what did these
American oil workers do?
They poured the vodka in
with the orange juice.
But this wasn’t Harry’s Bar in
Paris with skilled bartenders
and all the necessary equipment.
So, what did they use to stir
the vodka into the orange juice?
A screwdriver of course!
There’s another theory that dates it
slightly earlier, back to World War
II, to American soldiers who would
add vodka to their orange juice, which
clearly you are not meant to do if your
job involves handling deadly weapons.
And they would find themselves
mixing it all together with the
closest thing they had to hand: well,
you’ve guessed it,   a screwdriver.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on a brief history of cocktail
drinking and some of the potential
origins or at least claimed places
of origin of six of the most popular.
For almost every cocktail it seems
like there are half a dozen different
origin stories, so they are all
to be taken with a pinch of salt.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
What is your favourite cocktail, and why?
What are some other
interesting origin stories?
There are loads more fun ones, and
unfortunately we didn’t have time to
talk about Negronis, Gin and Tonics,
or the ridiculously strong “Zombie”.
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.